title|What, really, is an otaku?
date|23.07.2020
abstract|The otaku is, through many lenses, distorted in such a way that the shadow they cast bears little resemblance to the actual thing. By being the point at which many different identities are negotiated, such as nationalism and orientalism but mainly gender and the good life, the otaku signifies many things to many people, but rarely themselves. Can we see through these narratives?
arguments|noargs
lang|en
author|site

## Introduction

What is an otaku? In the west, an otaku is someone who consumes a lot of Japanese animated and drawn media - Anime and Manga. In Japan, otaku are defined as "people who are interested in a particular genre or object, are extraordinarily knowledgeable about it, but are lacking in social common sense". fn:{Kam (2013), cited via c::GalOtaku;;, p. 8} - a term seemingly similar to 'nerd' or 'geek'. Open and shut case. And yet, there is a large amount of discourse in western countries and Japan alike about what otaku are and how they are "the savior of the post-bubble economy" (more rarely) or "failed men who watch kiddie porn" (more often). While this might be dismissed as mere breathless tabloid reporting, whenever a group is so simply damned for what seems like obvious and perhaps somewhat ridiculous deviancy, we should pay attention. Based in large part on the fieldwork and extensive set of publications by anthropologist Patrick Galbraith, I will argue that the otaku is, through many lenses, distorted in such a way that the shadow they cast bears little resemblance to the actual thing. By being the point at which many different identities are negotiated, such as nationalism and orientalism but mainly gender and the good life, especially capitalist notions of the good life, the otaku signifies many things to many people, but rarely themselves. I will examine this discourse first from the perspective of foreigners (english-language foreign discourse, to be precise) writing about Japan, otaku, and anime, and then from the perspective of the Japanese national discourse on otaku, and especially on the Japanese 'critics' of otaku. After unraveling this discourse, I will set forth a tentative theory of how otaku might be understood to be living a genuinely different and radical conception of gender, of the good life. This will be ameliorated by considering some objections that are genuinely problematic to the self-conception of otaku. However, I conclude that in important ways, otaku *are* living a different conception of the good life. They might even be offering us hints on how one might live a life more free of the shackles that keep us married, hard-working, and depressed. Will we listen?

## The English-language discourse: Otaku loving body pillows or small girls

As stated in the introduction, there are people known as otaku in the west, roughly synonymous with anime/manga fan. These seem to rarely the focus of western media, however. They do share some of the deep ambivalence about being an otaku, fn:{c::HillsTranscultOtaku;;, p. 5ff}. They will therefore help us elucidate some of the discontents of being an otaku near the end of this paper.

It is surprising how often the discussion of otaku, who one would assume should be primarily defined through their media consumption, instead centers on their sexual activity. Specifically, they seem to be defined by two moments, an absence of 'normal sexual behavior' and a presence of 'abnormal sexual behavior.' Specifically, what is missing from otaku, who are in this narrative almost always male, is proper masculine sexual intercourse with a woman. Places where this assumption appears are legion. A particularly memorable one is cited by c::HillsTranscultOtaku;;: a 1995 film quizzes an otaku on his sex life. The otaku tries evade this binary question. The interviewer presses: Has he or has he not in fact had sex with a human?

However, otaku cannot be merely defined by their lack of sexual desires - especially given that 'wanting to have sex with many women' is part and parcel of the dominant American sexual identity. fnv:{Citation needed.} Therefore, more than just stories about 'sad men', western media and culture often focuses on the ridiculous and deviant sexual behavior that exists to fill this supposed lack. fnv:{c::GalCoolJapan;;, p. 109} In some cases, this merely emphasizes the sad loneliness of being 'too attached' to something that is 'not real'. In popular culture, *body pillows* with Anime characters drawn on them have come to hypersignify this sort of failing, as one can see in parodies such as the one in the sitcom *30 Rock*, where James Franco holds a body pillow and calls it Kimiko, much to the audience's amusement. fn:{The Moe Manifesto p. 4} fig:{James Franco and Kimiko:right:33:francoKimiko.jpg} What's sad here, and in other cases such as having a 'waifu' (a character towards which one is very attached) or an AI companion fn:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 6ff} is not just the lonelines, but of course also the person's failed masculinity. But one needn't stop there: Many of the characters on those bodypillows, and most characters in Manga and Anime generally, are underage. fn:{Highschool-age seems to be the most common age group.} If otaku desire these characters, how much of a leap is it really to say that otaku consume child pornography? And how much further is it to say that Japan as a whole has a child pornography problem? Such a thought process seems to be behind headlines such as 'Japan's Kiddie Porn Empire: Bye-Bye?'fn:{See that the daily beast article} In this way, the boundaries between the Other of the sexual deviant, the otaku, and the Japanese begins to blur, so that questions such as "Why is there such a fascination with sexual interaction with young girls - known as *[l]olicon* (Lolita complex) fn:{The japanese word　ロリコン would ordinarily be romanized as 'rorikon'. However, since Japanese does not distinguish between l-like and r-like sounds, it would be equally possible to transcribe it as 'lolicon', which, given the spelling of the root words in English, I will prefer.} in Japan." fn:{c::GalCoolJapan;;, p. 110} become salient. Perversion, pathology, and perhaps even criminality so become part and parcel with the western view of otaku.fn:{c::GalCoolJapan;;, p. 110} Perhaps also it causes the western view to redefine otaku or look away: Discussions of Lolicon remain taboo fnv:{c::GalCoolJapan;; p. 115ff}, and in my experience, explicit discussion of lolicon only exist at the very edges of the western Anime community.
Not many otaku identify as lolicon. Nevertheless, I will follow the example of the media and treat criticisms of lolicon as criticisms of otaku. This follows from the current manga and anime style and culture: Most anime and manga are drawn in *moe* style and include *moe* characters.fn:{See Gigguk moe video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E1x1RicXFMk} Moe will come up later as an affective response, but here it acts as a shorthand for a cute style that evolved from the shoujo style, also discussed later. fn:{Citation needed.} This, taken together with the fact that sexualization is not rare in manga or anime (although 'actual sex' is exceedingly rare) and the previously mentioned fact that many of the many female characters are underage, makes *almost every* manga/anime potentially lolicon. While it might be possible to separate more and less egregious examples, I remain deeply suspicious of attempts to separate 'good/normal' and 'weird' otaku. Therefore, I will see criticism of lolicon as criticism of otaku, *even where they would not self-identify as such*. This is visible in the video used above: Even though the video is about moe and doesn't feature any mention of lolicon or egregious sexualized scenes, the first comment (at time of writing) is still an in-joke referencing pedophilia:  <q> If you listen closely you can hear the FBI rushing toward's Gigguk's house", clearly a reference to child pornography and it being illegal. </q> fn:{https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E1x1RicXFMk}
Western academia, too, has taken aim at Lolicon. c::SavageJusLooking;; cites a whole host of studies aimed to prove that lolicon is directly linked to 'abnormal sexual desire', real-world child abuse, and therefore is in some sense wrong. Psychological and moral categories such as 'predatory', 'disturbing', 'compulsive cycles', 'misogynistic' amongst many others are marshalled in an attempt to 'make knowledge' and critique these behaviors.fn:{Mackie 2010 and Norma 2015, via c::GalOtaku;;, p 19f}

As a final remark on the English-language discourse, let us observe that not the entire discourse on otaku is negative: There is also a prevalent strand of discourse that sees otaku and japan as the epitome and cool. fn:{c::GalOtaku;; p. 109}

## Otaku in Japanese national discourse: Between villifying and educating

Otaku, in the meaning used in this paper, is in fact a relatively new word. オタク, as it would be spelled in the meaning used in this paper, is derived from お宅, pronounced the same but meaning 'you' amongst other things. fn:{Citation Needed} The context in which it was coined was in fact a guest column talking to the 'you' of the reader in a magazine (*Manga Burriko*) aimed at people enjoying the cute and sometimes risqué artstyle that we now know as lolicon style. In this column, the author Nakamori lumps together anyone he considers enjoying their passions 'too much' - trainspotters, fans of all stripes, and of course what we would consider otaku in the west, that is, (super)fans of Manga and Anime. fnv:{c::GalOtakuFailedMen;;, p. 26} But while this remains the standard definition up to this day, Nakamori immediately focuses on the otaku associated with liking their favorite characters all too much (what will later be called *moe* or the *moe* affect) and asks "Do 'Otaku' Love Like Normal People?" fn:{c::GalOtakuFailedMen;;, p. 26} From there, he riffs through the main points of their supposedly faulty and warped sexuality: They have a '2-d complex', they 'lack male skills' and could never 'get with a woman', they are 'strangely faggy'. fn:{c::GalOtakuFailedMen;;, p. 26}
Facing understandable backlash, the editor of *Manga Burriko* decides relatively quickly to end the guest column. However, in the last installation of the column, another writer (Eji Sonta) decides to take one last swing at otaku: That they are unwilling to 'grow up', 'accept reality' and especially the social role of family head and provider - that they have a 'reality problem'. fn:{c::GalOtakuFailedMen;;, p. 28f} Seemingly one point, there are actually two conflicting ideas here: otaku have a 'reality problem' in the sense that they can't tell reality from fiction, and in the sense that they don't want to accept the social reality of Japan. fnv:{c::GalOtakuFailedMen;;, p. 30}
No one represents the discourse of otaku failing to tell reality from fiction better than Miyazaki Tsutomu, fn:{not to be confused with Miyazaki Hayao} a serial killer, cannibal, child rapist and necrophile fn:{currently wikipedia} who targeted children between the ages of 4 and 7, who was found to be an otaku. In popular discourse, this became the motive for his crimes as well as his identity - in other words, he became "The otaku Murderer". fnv:{c::GalOtakuFailedMen;;, p. 30; c::FreedmanTrainMan;;}  He was presumed to have become a serial killer due to his different and excessive consumption of and engagement with Manga and Anime - he owned many tapes, had gone to Comiket fn:{Explanation needed}, and had produced fanzines - and as such, he became the symbol of a new idea of the otaku, the 'dangerous otaku'. fn:{c::PauseOtherMiyazaki;;}
This discourse of the 'dangerous' otaku will sound similar to anyone familiar with the moral panics surrounding 'satanic music' or 'dangerous video games' in the US and Germany, respectively. However, why are otaku said to be rejecting the social reality in Japan? The work of c::DasguSalarymen;; has shown that despite statements by individuals and governments promising, accepting and promoting other modes of living besides the patriarchal man-as-breadwinner, woman-as-homemaker mode of living, exactly this patriarchal norm still exerts profound pressure on men, and in turn these men and the structures they inhabit exert profound pressure on other men to conform to this norm. Specifically, in interviews with white-collar workers in northern Japan, he elucidates that for men to become *shakaijin* (responsible members of society), they have to - in their own view - not only becoming employed full-time at a company but also get married and start a family. People who do not so conform are "*hanninmae*, ... half a person ... not independent individuals but children waiting to grow up." fnv:{c::DasguSalarymen;;} One can see, then, how otaku are failing to live up to these expectations and therefore constitute a social problem. This is also reflected in supposedly positive portrayals of otaku: *Train Man*　(*densha otoko*), orignally a supposedly true story told in posts on 2-Channel, fn:{A very popular Japanese internet forum} is a redemption story. An otaku (the eponymous 'Train Man') saves a woman from sexual harassment and subsequently, a romantic relationship develops. It ends with the Train Man giving up his otaku-ness (literally he 'graduates' from it) to live a normal, happy life with his girlfriend - and one presumes they'll be married before too long. When adapted as a TV Series, the final episode drew 25.5% of the national television audience. While promoting a less alarmist and more positive portrayal of otaku, the story still treats being otaku as an undesireable trait, one that should be overcome through self-improvement to find happiness in the societally sanctioned institution of heterosexual marriage. Notably, in most adaptions, the otaku is ugly - and the one adaption that does not display him as such was criticised by critics for being unrealistic. As the story progresses, he becomes more attractive in dress and hairstyle. In this way, otaku seem to be potential romantic partners and responsible members of society, only in need of education and guidance - again, otaku become metaphorical children. fn:{all cf. c::FreedmanTrainMan;;}
Far from just telling otaku how they should act, this story does more: It subtly claims that otaku want to escape from their lifestyle, but can't. This is exemplified in the many guides to love and fashion that came out in the wake of *Train Man*, purporting to teach otaku the skills necessary to 'get the girl'. As c::FreedmanTrainMan;; states: <q> These guides attempt to profit from the belief that all otaku are *members of a subculture unified by shame*[.] </q> (Emphasis mine)
True or not, this is a convenient idea for Japanese society: By pairing up previously undesirable but now upgraded otaku with the career-focused, unmarried women known as 'loser dogs' (*make inu*), the problem of these otherwise perhaps resistent identities is solved, and these now happily married couples can go on to fix the problem of Japan's extraordinarily low birthrate.
Other positive images of otaku similarly position them as mere tools: One point that is often made is that otaku are superconsumers and should valued for the boost their economic activity gives the Japanese economy, which became especially important after the economic crash and subsequent stagnation of the 1990s. fn:{Citation needed.}

### Fujoshi

While much of the criticism of otaku in Japan is undoubtedly gendered, it is important to note that many of the stereotypes and criticisms of otaku find their parallel in criticisms of fujoshi. Fujoshi, written as 腐女子 and as such literally meaning 'rotten girl', are girls and women enthusiastic about *yaoi*, a genre that focuses on male-male romance and sex, though these men often do not identify as homosexual. Criticisms of Fujoshi also tend to focus on the fact that they fantasize about sex that is not child-bearing. Fujoshi, however seem to be more focused on keeping *yaoi* as a seperate part from their normal, heterosexual lives. fn:{c::GalFujoshi;; p. 211ff}

## Taking stock: Differences in the Japanese and English-language Perspectives

If we are trying to see the stereotypical views of otaku in order to see through them, it is important to consider in how far either the perspective of us as (probably) non-Japanese readers color us, that is not to imagine a <q> nightmare of sameness in which a global and homogenised culture seeps across East and West. </q> fn:{c::HillsTranscultOtaku;;, p. 4} On the other hand, we need to be careful to steer clear of ascribing any and all differences in the discourse to some sort of essential Japanese culture or Japaneseness. fnv:{c::HillsTranscultOtaku;;, p. 2ff}

### Nationalization

In the struggle for the identity of otaku, the Japanese state itself has a special interest, since their 'cool Japan' policies are invested in using Anime and Manga to promote the relevance of Japan abroad - and thus responsible for the higher public profile of the less-cool aspects of Anime and Manga. This in turn has led Japan to be more interested in policing these areas. fnv:{c::GalCoolJapan;;, p. 122f}
In a sense, then, all of this coverage of otaku in the English-speaking world is obliging these wishes - however, not everyone is happy: Many Japanese leaders now fear that the view of Japan being promoted is not the one they wish people to have. As an important Japanese businessman memorably summarizes: <q> It would be terrible if, under the banner of Cool Japan, we instead became Porno Japan. </q> fn:{c::GalOtaku;; p. 127}
There are definitely hints that this is the case. Morley and Robins 1995, cited by c::HillsTranscultOtaku;; claims that otaku provide a 'symbol' for Japaneseness, beings that "despise physical contact and love media, technical communication and the realm of reproduction and simulation in general." Likewise, it's unclear if James Franco's 30 Rock parody is meant to parody otaku or Japan - probably both. In seeking explanations, western media outlets like to connect the salient phenomenon of otaku with the salient phenomenon of Japan's low birthrate, explaining that 'young Japanese people aren't having sex' because they prefer being 'romantically involved with fictional girls.' fn:{c::GalOtakuFailedMen;;, p. 31} This fits comfortable in a orientalizing tradition of stories about 'weird Japan'. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 53} Academia seems if anything *more* vulnerable to this tendency: In the case of c::SavageJusLooking;;, a single sentence is enough to generalize her assertions to the whole of Japan. fn:{c::SavageJusLooking;;, p. 40}
In this way, both the Japanese and the English-language discourse signify much and are therefore emotionally laden - producing a similarly hysterical tone. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 60}

### Patriarchy international

A similarity can also be found in the treatment of otaku sexuality: This maps relatively cleanly on Gayle Rubins analysis that societies separate sex into "good" and "bad" sex, and that "good sex is safe, non-commercial, non-violent, coupled, heterosexual, focused on male genital penetration of the female genitals, monogamous and aimed toward childbirth, while bad sex is the opposite." fn:{Rubin 2011} This focus is obvious in the international depictions, Nakamori becomes so explicit as to become a case study for Rubins ideas: He sets up a hierarchy of sexual objects: From real women over nude photos of real women to the lower category of idol singers and finally, anime characters. fnv:{c::GalOtakuFailedMen;; p. 27} In both spheres, too, they are treated as too interested in non-real characters, as too feminine and failing in their masculine roles. Here, a tension reveals itself: On the one hand, otaku are presumed to genuinely desire the characters they profess to desire, on the other hand, they are seen as failed men that could not get with 'real girls' - presuming that they want to. As we have seen, this is the premise that the argument that otaku would act out these sexual urges on real children - or just act out this frustration by murdering people. While the perspective in Japan has shifted more to the latter idea of otaku-as-potential-predators, both views still exist - and are necessary to sustaining the idea of otaku as child-predators: Without their genuine attraction to underage characters, there is no reason to presume otaku becoming child-predators, as opposed to just predators generally. Without presuming that their attraction to characters is just a sublimation or sad excuse for real desire, there would be no reason to assume otaku to be predators.
While *Train Man* has no clearly Otaku-focused equivalent in the English-speaking world, it is basically identical to the countless 'geek gets girl' narratives common in Hollywood as elsewhere, in which the protagonist must become the dominant partner before the relationship can succeed. fnv:{c::FreedmanTrainMan;;}
However, in the English-speaking world, otaku might be told to 'get a life', fnv:{c::GalOtakuFailedMen;;, p. 31} but the ideal seems to be less a happily coupled socially responsible existence and more living out some kind of virile manliness - but both seem to see the life as someone mainly concerned with consumption of Manga and Anime as invalid. In total, I take it that by elucidating how these ideas of otaku are constructed, I have also unmasked them as the normatively motivated statements without truth value they are.

## Otaku in their own words...

Having seen many kaleidoscopic views of otaku, let us now again ask: What is an otaku?
It seems clear that in some way, otaku are defined by the relationship they have towards their media and more specifically, the characters within these media. This relationship is often called *moe*, written as the nominalization of 萌える　'to bud, sprout' but probably a misspelling of 燃える 'to burn'. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 63} What defines an otaku, then, as we shall see is their relationships with characters and people, and the strong emotions - *moe* - they feel for them. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 61ff. There is of course no 'otaku essence', the following should be taken as ways of doing otaku.}

### 2-D, 2.5-D, 3-D

One thing that tripped up our critics from before was their ambiguity if otaku really desired the characters, or if the characters were just stand-ins. In this context, it will be helpful to use a distinction made by many otaku between the 'three-dimensional' (*sanjigen*) and the 'two-dimentional' (*nijigen*), which, rather than denoting actual dimensions or a distinction between real and fictional, denote a distinction between the (real) human world and the (equally real) manga/anime world. It follows that 2.5-dimensional would refer to a liminal space between, a space often said to be filled amongst other things by maid cafés. fn:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 10}

### Otaku and Moe

The beginning of the otaku community coincides with the movement away from a more realistic drawing style called *gekiga* and towards a cuter and rounder style that is still typical of most anime and manga to this day. This style first appeared in shoujo ((for) girls) manga and birthed the bishoujo (cute/beautiful girl) character. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 24} People began to feel powerful attraction towards these characters, although what sort of attraction was not clear. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 30} Over time, this has resulted in a diverse material culture, as c::GalOtaku;; points out: <q> Manga/anime characters appear not only across media but also in various material forms—figurines, dolls, body pillows[.] </q> fn:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 63} Towards these characters - but importantly not towards 'real' people, except when performing as characters; that is, denizens of the two-dimensional - one can feel *moe*. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 63, 86} None other than perhaps the most famous anime filmmaker Hayao Miyazaki fn:{Not to be confused with the murderer Miyazaki} confessed - though with many qualifiers and conversational hedges - to have fallen in love with an anime character when he was a young adult. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 73f} Perhaps this is not so odd: Falling in love with stars, who are in a sense as unreal as anime characters are, is seen to be a fairly normal part of being a teenager - although something one is supposed to grow out of. This sense of 'teenage folly', which was also present in the earlier criticisms, can hide the genuine strength of these feelings, however. Quoting Saitou Tamaki (who is referring to Hayao Miyazaki), c::GalOtaku;; states:

> "[T]o love an anime is, in other words, to love (*moeru*) the beautiful girls in anime. An anime creator is born from the experience of moe as a trauma, and the next generation of anime fans finds moe in the heroines he creates." fn:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 74}

In other words, the feeling of *moe* is so strong as to motivate a person's whole artistic career, an idea also echoed by others. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 82} Even thirty years or more later, recalling characters that these people fell in love with produces an emotional response, and they flag their affection by using suffixes showing affection such as '-chan' and describing these characters as their 'first love.' fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 83}
Miyazaki is quick to qualify that these feelings are definitely not a replacement or the equal of feelings towards 'real women.' fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. CITATION NEEDED} Others are not so sure: <q> People don’t imagine a relationship with an anime character because they couldn’t get a girlfriend, but rather they fell in love with a character in the first place… </q> Though the depth and length of feeling *moe* varies, certainly many would assert that moe is no less emotionally significant, no less committed, and no less valuable than love towards a 'real person.' fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 92} Many would consider themselves 'bisexual' for inhabitants of both the three-dimensional and two-dimensional.
For many, however, feeling *moe* is a double-edged sword. In describing his feelings towards a female character in one of his works, Hayao Miyazaki notes:

> "It’s a feeling of extraordinary longing and frustration, an awareness of another world that is out of reach…" fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 78}

### Otaku = Queer?

Even outside the relationships with characters and rejection of love capitalism, otaku do things that we might conceptualize as a different way of 'doing gender', in the sense of Butler. fnv:{Judith Butler has published extensively on the construction of gender, and her ideas implicitly underlie the ideas in this paragraph. In short, she argues that gender, rather than being an identity is constructed and reconstructed through normal daily acts, which she would call performances. For more info, see Citation Needed.} In this context, c::GalOtaku;; argues that anime and manga are uniquely positioned to allow radical (re)imagination of identity and relationships, since they both in style and in mode of storytelling are very different from reality and more 'real' media such as film. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 11} Quoting McCloud, he states:

> "When you look at a photo or realistic drawing of a face you see it as the face of another. But when you enter the world of the cartoon you see yourself…" fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 12}

While this is all well and good, how do otaku *actually* reimagine identity? Above, we had said that the consumption of media featuring bishoujo characters was due to genuine desire towards the characters themselves. However, more than just this, we can also see *identification* with the bishoujo characters. From the 1970s onwards, when shoujo manga as well as the subset of shoujo manga known as BL (Boy's Love) manga became popular, shoujo manga had a male readership. There is, for example, Itou Kimio, who encountered shoujo manga and describes that his generation was able to use BL Manga  <q> to liberate [themselves] from the pretense [of being] tough guys. </q> fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 20ff} Especially for manga and anime with fantastical worlds full of kindness and color, many men seemed and seem to be drawn to be part of this world, or even be one of the (mostly female) main characters, and by being immersed in this world to be and to feel like 'a girl', that is, feel and act as if located in a social position that society largely reserves for 'girls'. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 30ff} Again Miyazaki:  <q> This type of youth [young males, mentioned before] begins to feed the girl within himself. The girl is part of him, and a projection of himself… These girls express nostalgia for a self that was free of the detritus of life. The girl is not living outside of him; she is the very self that he has nurtured inside himself. </q>  This all is to say that otaku are attracted to female manga and anime characters with the strength that they are in part because these allow the otaku to play with gender, a play that is both freeing and fun. And one needn't stop there: Within the world of animation, one might learn to live in worlds of 'plasmatic possibility.' fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 81} Though not completely equivalent, genderbending by costuming as a character of a different gender ('crossplay') is also common. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 111ff} otaku also at times advocate a broad alliance between them and other queer groups, including people of 'heretical sexual orientations', people loving boys, as well as the unpopular more generally. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 118}

Also relevant are the artistic (and pornographic) works of the contributors to 'parody' magazines in the shoujo style: Artists such as Azuma Hideo drew not only in the cute shoujo style, but would often parody or leave out men entirely - in stark contrast to the penetration-dominated pornographic style of the gekiga. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 28} When a lolicon-magazine ran a mostly naked model on one page and a bishoujo-style image on the other, this produced a backlash - in favor of removing naked images of 'real' women entirely. fnv:{Citation needed.} This points to an understanding of sexuality that is deeply uncomfortable with the hegemonic, power-focused narratives available.

### Otaku vs. Love capitalism

A criticism of otaku mentioned before was that otaku fail to become *shakaijin*, that is, a married and family-supporting responsible members of society. Preconditioned as this is on a stable and well-paid job, it has become more difficult with the collapse of the bubble economy in the late 1980s.fn:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 10} Even beyond this though, otaku often feel uncomfortable with the system that preconditions love and affection on financial success and performing masculinity, termed 'love capitalism.' (*ren'ai shihonshugi*) fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 92} Being an otaku and feeling *moe* is a way of opting out from these "impossible ideals" that creates "so-called losers", and the potential unhappiness of giving up oneself - as required of anyone following the *shakaijin* path:
> "Giving up on life" – you often hear it on TV and things, and also when friends get married they say things like "Well, it’s all over" … For all of them [i.e. his friends], you get married, and after the children are born the wife doesn’t work, so on just your own income, after taking into account money needed for supporting the wife and kids, there’s nothing left over for enjoyment … I guess it’s just continuous endurance, endurance, endurance, endurance, but even then, they seem to get some basic level of enjoyment out of it! fn:{c::DasguSalarymen;;, p. 178}
The contrast drawn by those speaking on love capitalism is stark and almost certainly often based off the life experiences of those talking. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 93} Even so, many otaku would probably not feel cofortable calling their way of living a 'mere alternative, given the circumstances.'

### Plural otaku

While it must necessarily remain brief, it is important to mention that otaku is not an identity that precludes interacting with people, whether three-dimensional co-otaku or 2.5-dimensional characters such as maids or cosplayers. Otaku meet to collaborate on fanzines, hang out at conventions and experience their favorite media together. In Tokyo, Akihabara (often shortened to Akiba) is - though highly contested - a site where consumption, co-creation, performance amongst others coexist, all while maintaining the ability to be who one wants to be, to "escape the principle of identity". Akihabara has been known to be 'festival-like.' fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 97ff}

### Giving up on otaku

While there isn't much literature on giving up being an otaku, we can draw some conclusions based on the experience of Fujoshi. Fujoshi, much as otaku, value their ability to see more in the world than 'normals.' fn:{c::GalMoeFujoshi;;} Specifically in the case of fujoshi, many feel the need to 'graduate' once 'real life' demands increase, a moment that in c::GalFujoshi;; feels profoundly sad. fnv:{c::GalFujoshi;; 227ff} It is, in it's <q> loss fo space for queer fantasy </q> fn:{c::GalFujoshi;; 228} similar to a loss of childhood and play, the kind that we often lament and mourn. But is this the only reason one gives up being an otaku, a fujoshi. Or could it be that being otaku has its discontents?

## ... But can we believe them?

When reading the anthropology of Galbraith, there remains one thing that is hard to square: While the portrayals and self-portrayals in Galbraith are generally positive, anybody who has spent any time as part of the american online anime community will know how much self-loathing exists in the community. The traces of this are numerous and easy to find: Memes such as 'anime is trash and so am I', complaints about loneliness and depression as well as anger at the inability to live up to one's own expectations of being more sociable, productive or successful are all part of common discourse. fn:{Photos} In personal communication, even people who consumed a lot of anime and would be considered to be otaku at least in the West did not share the attitudes described by Galbraith above - how much of this remains true in Japan requires further research and is outside of the scope of this paper. Ameliorating this point, it's unclear how much of this represents internalized self-loathing based on the societal standards and predjudices discussed at length. Internalized self-loathing is hard to assess, but clearly not all otaku share the traits discussed above.
In addition, another similar point has been raised: How much of otaku's desire towards characters is genuine, and how much is there to avoid engaging with things and people one would rather not have to deal with?
This can be borne out in two ways: On the one hand, critics such as the ones featured in the first two sections would perhaps assert that otaku 'really desire' 'real girls', but are too scared to engage with them. This is no doubt based on the previously elucidated idea that these critics cannot imagine a masculinity that is not premised on desiring and being 'successful' with women, but we needn't buy into that idea. It is certainly plausible that a subset of otaku do not genuinely prefer interactions with characters to 'real people', and for those, the self-descriptions above might not hold - that is, these people would rather have interactions with three-dimensional people, but don't. Certainly, the split assessment of media like the aforementioned *Train Man* within the otaku community points to a less homogeneous picture than painted above. fn:{Needs train man footnote}
On the other hand, the criticism has been raised that the disengagement from 'real women' is in fact a rejection of women who have agency, either on the part of a larger Japanese society that cannot brook women who are not subservient to men at all times, or specifically on the part of otaku, more specifically those involved with lolicon. fnv:{c::SavageJusLooking;;, p. 38f} These often point to the prevalence of rape storylines within this media, but also raise the criticism that no matter what, "Images cannot say 'no.'"fn:{Walkerdine (1997) cited via c::SavageJusLooking;;, p. 39} In addition, there is a lot of evidence that 'nerdy' fan communities tend to be sexist in their outlook, the otaku community being no exception. fn:{Citation needed, c::GalOtaku;;, p. 93} However, in light of their othered status within Japanese society, it seems a little ridiculous to claim that otaku somehow represent the avant-garde of Japanese patriarchal reaction. What we find is probably similar to the assessment by MISSING NAME, that fierce competition within otaku subcultures might be in part a sign of the reproduction of the patriarchal, hierarchical relationships otaku claim to desire to leave behind. fn:{Citation needed.}

## I want to break free

In how far we believe in the positive narratives of otaku, it is hopefully clear that the negative narratives rest not so much on any feature of otaku themselves, but rather on the fears and desires of the society themselves. This all does not remain without consequences: Fear of being labeled an otaku and especially being labelled a lolicon or worse, a child porn fetishist, has had chilling effects on the expression and publication of material many times, both in the US and Japan. In the US, some people have served jail time for the posession of lolicon manga. fnv:{c::GalCoolJapan;;, p. 119ff} Perhaps worse, as we have seen, these narratives feed a culture of self-loathing within these communities, where they are not shut down by authorities. fn:{c::GalAkiba;;} Certainly, there are people who are otaku but would rather not be, and their identities should not be seen as invalid. In this vein, more research is needed into the more contradictory aspects of otaku culture. However, unless we are willing to say that we are happy with the way mainstream society links relationships, competition, and capitalism, limits the forms of affection it considers legitimate, and prevents any kind of imaginative play, we should not be too hasty to dismiss otaku. We may have something to learn from them.


# Cut content

Perhaps one of the most salient images of otaku togetherness is the maid café, where <q> waitresses called 'maids' (*meido*) serve food and drink, pose for photographs, and play games with customers. </q> fn:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 148} This has invited straightforward readings of patriarchal dominance and feminine submission, or only slightly more kindly, a blatant capitalist cash-grab exploiting lonely otaku. fnv:{c::GalOtaku;;, p. 149} The claims of patrons and maids alike read differently, however:
Pretending that children and women and the nexus between them, the young girl, cannot be sexual splits them in two: The pure, innocent virgin and the sexual creature. Since to the society, only the virgin exists, the sexual creature is hidden from sight. Even if she is abused, she cannot communicate it, for to communicate it would be to assert her existence - which doesn't exist. In this way *honne* and *tatemae* are constructed that only allow one one to *Gaman* one's suffering. Far from being a specifically Japanese phenomenon however, this is being imposed from the west.
I argue that critics who dismiss otaku and Lolicon as somehow inherently sexist are operating in a frame of judgement that can only be sustained in reference to patriarchal ideas of desire as productive and childbearing and desire as exclusively 'real' and 'useful', that in their perhaps honest, perhaps facetious critique of otaku they themselves are strengthening the sexism they profess to abhor.
By all rights, I'm probably an otaku. Otaku, at least in the US and German Anime scenefn:{Whenever I speak of anime in a general context, I mean to include Anime as well as Manga, Visual Novels and Dating Simulators, as well as other media with a anime/manga-esque aesthetic.} I am a part of, is defined mostly by self-identification as well as by clout in having watched many anime, owning anime merchandise, learning Japanese, and attending 'festivals' of anime. I score three out of four. And yet, I would hesitate to do so. I would hesitate to do so because there is a discourse that systematically misunderstands and devalues otaku by means of ideas of the good life that are deeply capitalist and sexist in nature.
atrick Galbraith, an anthropologist and the preeminent researcher on otaku, without whose work this paper would have not been possible, has devoted his field work to otaku.
Otaku are often seen as failed men or sexual deviants. Both in Japan and abroad, they are often the subject of suspicion, mockery, and scorn. In this paper, I elucidate how this image is constructed and how, in contrast, otaku construct their own self-image. From a foreign perspective, otaku often come to symbolize all of Japan. For a specific subset of people, this results in an image that is positive and interesting, but this is merely the mirror image of the more prevailing idea, that Japan is different, strange, and in need of regulation, especially in regards to sexual content and *Lolicon*. The positive image is found in Japanese foreign language students, the negative prevails in the media. In Japan itself, much of the discourse focuses on otaku's inability to find partners and become productive members of society, as can be seen by the vitriol launched at them in columns and speeches. A 'redemption story' of an otaku, watched by 25% of the Japanese TV audience, involves them giving up on their identity completely to become happily coupled with a 'normal' woman. In contrast, otaku themselves often express their desire to be separate from the social world and its unfulfillable demands, especially also *love capitalism*. They see their desire and affection (*moe* in Japanese) for non-real characters and worlds not as desire for an inferior substitute, but as something genuine in its own right. This births new forms of interaction with humans and characters alike. This is, however, not the sentiment of all otaku, and there is a strong self-loathing voice present in the community. How much of this self-loathing represents societal attitudes seeping in and how much is genuine dissatisfaction remains unclear.
The way in which otaku are talked about in terms of gender and especially as feminine, weak, and unsexual shows how deeply Patriarchy still determines our thoughts, in Japan as well as abroad.
For Nakamori and Eji Sonta, lolicon seemed to be an orientation toward fictional
girl characters that reflected and reinforced the social and sexual immaturity of otaku.
Shigematsu Setsu, drawing on Akagi’s work, eloquently explains the ‘real problem’
that otaku posed: for Nakamori and Eji Sonta, /olicon meant an orientation toward
‘two-dimensional images of cuteness, which ‘replace a lack of desire for the "real
thing" - a lack of desire that young men are "naturally" supposed to possess for real
young women’ (Shigematsu, 1999, pp. 131-2). Men with such an unnatural lack of
desire for the real thing, and an unnatural abundance of desire for fictional girl
characters, were called otaku by Nakamori and Eji Sonta. Shigematsu astutely refers to
lolicon as a ‘fetishism for cuteness, which resonates with the critique of otaku in terms
of ‘two-dimensional fetishism’ (Schodt, 1996, p. 48). Sexual desire for fictional girl
characters, an orientation toward the fictional, cute and unreal, was sometimes referred
to among manga and anime fans as a ‘sickness’ (byōki) (Akagi, 1993, p. 231; Yoshimoto,
2009, pp. 174-5)." Being ‘sick’ this way, lacking ‘normal’ or ‘natural’ desire for real
women, derails reproductive maturity. Otaku are a ‘real problem’ because they refuse to
adjust to social reality and instead maintain an orientation toward fictional alternatives. c::GalOtakuFailedMen;; 30
At a time when manga and anime circulate worldwide, and anthropologists write
that otaku are a ‘taken-for-granted feature of the global cultural landscape’ (Ito, 2012,
p. xxvii) and ‘there is a little bit of otaku in all of us’ (Condry, 2013,p. 203), it may seem
as if the discourse about otaku is entirely more positive. However, the perception of
otaku as failed men persists in Japan today (see Kam, 2013, pp. 159-61, 163-5; also this
volume). Beyond Japan, we still regularly see the term otaku associated with sexual
attraction to fictional girl characters. In the span of just a few days in October 2013, the
Guardian published an article claiming that ‘young Japanese aren't having sex, which
included descriptions of men romantically involved with fictional girls (Haworth,
2013), and BBC News Magazine reported on ‘a new breed of Japanese men, the ofaku,
who love manga, anime and computers - and sometimes show little interest in sex’
(Rani, 2013). What is striking here is that Nakamori and Eji Sonta might have written
these sentences. The discourse about otaku in Japan in 1983 demonstrates the process
of labelling problematic manga and anime fans, a process that continues abreast with
the normalization and naturalization of ‘otaku’. ‘"Otaku" Research’ also reveals
deep-seated anxieties in media and consumer societies about potential deviation
from proper social and sexual development, which continues to haunt the discourse
on ‘otaku.
c::GalOtakuFailedMen;; 31
Instead of merely blaming women for selfishly choosing careers over marriage and family, AERA
and other news magazines have published lengthy discussions about why men, especially those
with so-called 'high specs' of advanced education, elite jobs and good looks, are choosing to
marry late or not at all and about the need to change the salaryman system so that fathers can
play a larger role in the family. The main reasons given for men who do not marry are based on
emotions, implying that they could marry but choose not to. c::FreedmanTrainMan;;
actual descriptions of lolicon history c::GalCoolJapan;;, p. 111 - 114
potential for subversion in lolicon c::GalCoolJapan;;, p. 114
more history of otaku and lolicon c::GalOtakuFailedMen;; p. 21ff

It is important to acknowledge that not all otaku have felt positively about the mentality depicted
in Train Man or the discourse on masculinity it engendered. Many instead have expressed a
sense of pride at being part of a community apart from greater society and were angered by the
suggestion that they should change. For example, in his March 2005 400-page book manifesto
that sold 33,000 copies in its first three months, Denpa otoko (Radio Wave Man) and the
September 2005 sequel Denpa taisen (Radio Wave Crusade), prolific journalist and selfproclaimed
extreme otaku Honda Toru criticised Train Man for advancing the notion that otaku
are inferior to members of mainstream culture and that they should transform their identities for
what he scorned as 'love capitalism' (renai-shihonshugi) that might lead to unfulfilled desires.[49]
Honda states Hermes should have been willing to change for Train Man, and he should have
made her into an Akihabara otaku.[50] For example, in December 2005, the Akiba Blog, reported
signs placed near sales displays of the Train Man television series DVD in Akihabara that 'Real
otaku Don't Desire Live 3-D Women.' Behind the extremely misogynistic slogan lay the idea that
otaku might want to seek alternatives to mainstream visions of romance.[51] In one episode of
the television drama Akihabara@DEEP, the otaku heroes discuss the impossibility of a
relationship like that between Train Man and Hermes. c::FreedmanTrainMan;;
