title|What, really, is an Otaku? - Introduction
date|02.07.2020
abstract|Matrikelnummer 408060, Hausaufgabe 3
arguments|noargs
lang|en
author|David Samuel Swartzberg
What is an otaku? At first blush, someone who consumes a lot of Japanese animated and drawn media. Open and shut case. And yet, there is a large amount of discourse in western countries and Japan alike about what otaku are and how they are "the savior of the post-bubble economy" (more rarely) or "failed men who watch kiddie porn" (more often). While this might be dismissed as mere breathless tabloid reporting, whenever a group is so simply damned for what seems like obvious and perhaps somewhat ridiculous deviancy, we should pay attention. Based on the fieldwork and extensive set of publications by anthropologist Patrick Galbraith, I will argue that the otaku is, through many lenses, distorted in such a way that the shadow they cast bears little resemblance to the actual thing. By being the point at which many different identities are negotiated, such as nationalism and orientalism but mainly gender and the good life, especially capitalist notions of the good life, the otaku signifies many things to many people, but rarely themselves. I will examine this discourse first from the perspective of foreigners writing about Japan, otaku, and anime, and then from the perspective of the Japanese national discourse on otaku, and especially on the Japanese 'critics' of otaku. After unraveling this discourse, I will set forth a tentative theory of how otaku might be understood to be living a genuinely different and radical conception of gender, of the good life. This will be ameliorated by considering some objections that are genuinely problematic to the self-conception of otaku. However, I conclude that in important ways, Otaku *are* living a different conception of the good life. They might even be offering us hints on how one might live a life more free of the shackles that keep us married, hard-working, and depressed. Will we listen?
